[Transcript missing]
Good.
Well, I'm pretty tired, too.
So welcome to the last
session of the week,
Accessing Contacts and
Calendars on Leopard.
My name is Matt Drance.
I'm the Sharing Technologies Evangelist
here at Apple,
and it is my pleasure to play us out.
I don't know what that means,
play us out.
Does it mean end the show?
I don't know.
Somebody got it.
Thank you.
So we're going to be talking about two
really critical frameworks to providing
an excellent user experience on Mac OS X:
the Address Book framework and
the Calendar Store framework.
These two frameworks are
important to you as a developer,
but they're also important to the
applications that Apple writes to,
and you've seen their
effect in multiple places.
The address book framework helps you
add personal contacts to data that would
otherwise be arbitrary and confusing.
Here's a screenshot of iChat with
a bunch of random screen names.
And iChat uses the address book framework
to take this overwhelming data and
turn it into something that an average
person can immediately recognize.
First name and last name, picture.
Now I just take one glance at
this window and I immediately
know really what I'm looking at.
Likewise,
the Calendar Store framework allows you
to take pieces of data that are around in
the system and give the user an effective
hook into the Calendar Store framework
that's used by iCal and a bunch of
other applications on the system.
So, Mail is one of these clients,
and Mail's got some pretty clever data
detectors that will allow you to just
create an event right out of the blue.
And you also get a lot of additional
perks by working with these frameworks.
All of the data that you read
and write using Calendar Store or
Address Book are automatically
synced to MobileMe and before that,
.Mac.
And of course, all of this data also is
synchronized to the iPhone.
And like I said,
working with this data is
important to providing a consistent
user experience on the Mac,
particularly because the
standard has been set,
the bar has been set by
the Apple applications.
These are just a few.
Dashboard, iChat, Safari, iPhoto, iTunes,
and Mail.
Pretty much every application
on the system has some hook into
Address Book and iCal so users can
stay connected and stay informed.
And it's a challenge for you as
a developer to make sure that
you're doing the same thing,
that you're living up to that standard.
I mean, this is really the difference.
Anybody can put a window
on the screen and launch an
app and work with some data,
but it's stuff like this that propels you
to popularity in the community and things
like winning an Apple Design Award.
There's a lot that goes into
winning an Apple Design Award,
but personalization and familiarity
and consistency with other areas on
the platform are a big part of that.
So let's go ahead and get
started with contacts.
And as I already said,
contacts are provided by
the address book framework.
And the first thing the address book
framework gets you is free persistence.
So if you're writing an application
that does contact management or project
management and has either a trivial or
critical connection with contact data,
if you use the address book framework,
you don't need to worry about
persisting that information.
It's all taken care of for you.
And we worry about scale and
performance and redundancy
and consistency and all that.
And most importantly,
it gives you integration with
the Address Book application,
which is more than just the
double-clickable app that
you see on the file system,
but additional related
services like Spotlight.
If you write contact information
using the Address Book framework,
those contacts are now
searchable in the Spotlight menu.
Likewise, the Address Book Dashboard
widget has that data.
And again,
applications like Mail and iChat.
Also use this data whenever it's
available for a better user experience.
So the details of the
Address Book framework.
We're going to stay pretty high
level here because we've got two
frameworks to cover in one hour.
So I'm going to give you an
overview of the object model.
Specifically,
there are two main types of data that you
work with in the Address Book framework,
people and groups.
We've got structured search elements
that you put together when you're
looking for specific pieces of data
and you want to get a real person,
a vCard out of that.
And we also have a reusable UI element
that you can use to provide a really
consistent experience from what you
see in Mail and iChat and Address Book.
So the object model is very simple.
There is a base class called
AB Record that has the
core pieces of information,
like a unique ID,
as well as a hash of properties and keys
and values for things like first name,
last name, birthday.
And then the stuff that you'll
actually be working with,
you're not going to be really
working with AB record directly,
is AB Person, which is a subclass,
of course,
and it has more things that are
attributed to people as opposed
to records in the database,
like an image, as well as groups that
the person belongs to.
And we also have groups.
And if you want to just go ahead and
launch the Address Book application,
you can see what we're talking about.
The groups are on the left,
people are on the right.
And groups are straightforward.
They've got a list of members
and a list of subgroups,
so we can have hierarchical
groups in the Address Book.
And you have access to all of
this stuff through the framework.
So because we're limited on time,
we're going to concentrate
on people today,
and I think that's probably what
most people are interested in.
Anyway.
So the A/B Person class gives you most
of this personal information that's
going to be used in various places.
And these are all stored as keys
in that key value dictionary.
So we've got things like first name,
last name, the person's birthday,
email addresses, AIM or Jabber IDs,
home pages, as well as physical address.
And those are just a few.
There's tons of information
available to you through A/B Person.
So let's get into the code.
It's really straightforward.
To read information
out of a given person,
you start by importing the
Address Book framework.
So those of you who are
new to the platform,
you either drag or add a
framework to the project.
In this case, it's Address Book.
You import the Address Book header.
You get the shared Address Book.
This is a singleton instance that
does most of the work for you.
And then we go ahead and get a person.
And there are a bunch
of ways to get a person.
In the interest of simplicity,
on this slide,
we're doing it using a unique ID that
presumably was stored somewhere else.
And we'll go over searching
in a little while.
And then we just start
getting the information.
Very straightforward key
value sort of coding.
And you've probably seen this if
you've gone to other Cocoa sessions,
like Core Data or Bindings.
You do value for property,
and these constants are defined
in the Address Book headers as
well as in the documentation.
So properties like first name,
last name are very straightforward.
And then writing that information
is pretty much the same code.
Instead of value for property,
you say set value for property
using the same constants as before.
Now, this is very important.
When you're done writing
information in the address book,
whatever information it is,
you need to remember to call
save on the address book
instance that you got before.
If you don't do this,
the data that you wrote is just going
to disappear as soon as you quit.
So at the time that you're setting,
when you set values on a person,
you're just setting values
on something in memory.
So the save is what commits it to disk.
So first name and last name,
very straightforward.
They're just strings.
You go ahead and get the property,
you get a string.
You pass in the property,
you get a string back.
But there are a lot of other
pieces of information that can be
redundant and have multiple values,
like phone numbers, or addresses,
or email addresses.
A lot of the things that we use for
communication have multiple values.
So how's this data handled?
It's handled with a special
data type called AB Multivalue.
These are basically typed collections.
You can think of it as a
dictionary if you want.
But the keyword is typed.
So we have string-based multivalues
for things like phone numbers,
IM, handles, email addresses, etc.
Multi-string is the
prominent type of multivalue.
We've got multi-dictionaries
for things like addresses,
because an address has
multiple lines to it.
So each address is a dictionary,
and the address property is
a multi-dictionary value.
And of course, things like dates for
anniversaries or birthdays,
although I'm pretty sure most
people only have one birthday.
And every value inside that
multi-value has a label for
things like work and home,
and you can see that
up here on the screen.
It's also got a unique identifier,
and this is handy for when
you're doing fast enumeration
on the values that you get out,
as well as for persistence.
So if you want to save a
reference to a specific value,
you go ahead and you iterate through,
and you've decided that you
found the value you want,
you can save that identifier and just
go pull it right back out next time.
You don't have to iterate again.
So how do you get at these multivalues?
How do you know what
you're coding before?
Because like I said,
you can have multi-string,
multi-dictionary, multi-dates.
So how do you negotiate this?
Because there's only
one AB multivalue class.
Well, basically,
you have to just look through the pieces,
the information that we provide in
our documentation in SDK to find out
what you're going to be working with.
So first thing you do is look
up the property and the type,
and you can do this in
the abglobals.h header.
So in this case,
we're looking at the email property,
which, like I said before,
is a multi-string.
So the comments in the
headers will tell you that.
You can also look in our documentation,
which is a little more
friendly on the eyes.
The AB person class reference has
a clean list of all the different
properties that we provide by default
and what kind of multivalue they are,
whether it be multi-string, multi-date,
multi-dictionary, etc.
So the first thing you need to do is find
out what data you're going to get at,
and that will then tell you what kind
of multivalue you're dealing with.
Now, once you've done that,
it's time to write some code.
Again, everything in AB Person is
just value for property,
and what you get back changes
based on what the property is.
So in this case,
we've got the email property,
and it's going to be an AB Multi-Value.
So I mentioned before those identifiers.
I'm just going to iterate through
all of the values that I get
back until I find the one I want.
In this case,
I want somebody's work email.
So I check the label,
and I check it against the
constant for the work label.
And there we go.
I go ahead and store it,
and I break out of the loop,
and I move on.
So that's great,
and you've seen I'm using
this nebulous unique ID here,
and where did that come from?
So that's not really realistic.
Most of the time,
when you're dealing with
the Address Book framework,
you're going to have some
piece of information,
like an email address,
and a ton of contacts
in the Address Book.
And how do you go ahead and find
that one person that corresponds
to that piece of information?
This is what searching is all about.
And when you're working
with the Address Book,
most of you are probably
going to be doing searches.
So you do that using these
AB Search Element objects.
And it's pretty straightforward.
You just call this Search Element for
Property method on the property
type that you're interested in,
so in this case, the KAB email property.
So we're going to search for
somebody's email address.
And you set the label and key,
usually you're going to set these to nil.
Before, like I said, we have work, home,
mobile, labels.
In this case, if you set those to nil,
it'll basically search all of
the values in the property.
And the key, of course,
is for multi-dictionary.
So in the case of email,
email is just a multi-string.
Key doesn't matter anyway.
And then you specify the value
that you're searching for,
and go ahead and look at abtypedefs.h,
and that will tell you these
constants for all the comparisons.
Here we've got ab=caseinsensitive.
I believe we've got
prefix and case sensitive.
You know, the standard matches,
standard compare types that you
would expect in a search like this.
So that's searching.
The ability to pluck out
exactly what you're looking for.
But there's some additional
nuances to using search that
you need to be aware of.
And there's a huge
performance win here as well,
obviously because you
don't have to loop through.
So in the brute force sense,
you don't need to do it,
but there's a lot going on here
that you should know about.
So this is the brute force approach.
I wanted to get all the emails
and all the phone numbers
and all the aim properties,
all the aim names out of
everybody the address book.
So if I was going to do this
in a very straightforward way,
I would just get all the
people in the Address Book,
which is hitting the disk
initially to get all the records.
Then I go ahead and I ask each
person for -- go through each person,
ask them for the email property,
the phone number,
as well as their instant message ID.
And you notice that we
got a list of people,
but
Hi, I'm Matt Drance,
and I'm the founder of
the Leopard platform.
I'm a member of the Leopard team,
and I'm going to talk
about the Leopard platform.
I'm going to talk about
the Leopard platform,
and I'm going to talk
about how to use it.
This is a serious scalability problem
if you're dealing with a large address
book or a networked address book
that has some latency tied to it.
So search is a really good
way to get around this.
So rather than iterating through
and just pulling the properties out,
we're going to construct a compound
search element to go pull this data.
So I'm going to do one
for the email property,
one for the phone property.
And for the instant message property.
And you notice what we're doing here,
we're doing a not equal to nil.
Basically,
anybody who's got an email address
or a phone number or an AIM name,
give those back to me.
Now, this is not just a search where
we're going to get those people back,
because the Address Book framework
uses these search elements as a hint.
So the framework now knows that
this is the data you're looking for.
So we're going to go ahead and
preload all of that stuff when we
return the matching records to you.
And there's one last step,
which is to actually combine-- right
now we have three search elements,
and we need to combine them into one.
So we put them in an array,
and we create a conjunction
between those search elements
with a type of KAB search and.
And we also have search or.
So you can construct some
pretty complicated search
elements if you need to.
So now what happens?
Now instead of getting a list of
all the people in the Address Book,
regardless of who they are and
what they have in their records,
we pass-- we call records matching
search element with that search
element we just constructed.
And this is the one time that the
framework is going to hit the disk now,
because it's got all the information,
all the requests it needs.
And then when we-- excuse me.
I was expecting another
disk icon to show up,
but that's the whole point.
There's no step two.
When the search element returns,
we've already got all
the data pre-populated.
So when we go ahead and we
start looping through them,
there's no more I/O.
We've got everything we need in memory.
So this is significantly faster,
especially when you start to scale out,
like I said before.
So that's search.
Search is something you're going
to want to get to know very well.
I kept using the word
"personalization" in the introduction.
So to that end,
the address book framework, of course,
has image data.
You've got pictures of the people
of the friends and family that the
person has in their address book.
And you can get at this using the
framework using one of two methods.
The first one is AB Person image data,
which gives you an NSData reference
representing the bitmap image for
that person in the address book.
Now, this is a blocking call.
So we also have an asynchronous method,
begin loading image data for client,
that you specify a callback for
when the image data is done.
And this is probably the way
you want to go because if you're
dealing with a long list of people,
you don't want to block the event thread.
You want to just have that stuff,
wait until it's ready, particularly if,
like I said, if you have a long list,
and if you're dealing with something
like a networked address book,
which you probably don't
know as the developer.
The user probably knows that they've
got a networked address book,
but by then it's too late because
you've already written the application.
So use the asynchronous method.
It's not that much -- it's
not more complicated at all.
And you notice this is an NSData.
It's not an NSImage,
but we have a constructor for NSImage
that takes NSData as an argument,
so very straightforward.
It's just one extra line of code.
And of course,
not every person has a picture-- not
everybody has a picture for every
single person in their Address Book.
So just to add a little
bit more customization,
a little more personalization,
you can go ahead and fall back to
something like the default NSUserImage
that we provide to you as part of Cocoa.
So go ahead and try
to get the person out,
search for them by name,
and get the image data.
If it's nil, just go ahead and throw
that NSUserImage up.
And let's show you what
that looks like right now.
So to make this interesting,
I did not write this application.
This is actually a Core Data example,
that you can find in
Developer Examples Core Data.
It was written for Tiger,
when Core Data was introduced.
And luckily, it has context and
calendar information in it.
So what we're going to do today is we're
just going to wire this application up
to the Address Book and iCal Frameworks,
which I think is more interesting,
anyway,
because there might be people in the
crowd who have already written something
and are just looking at Address Book and
Calendar Stores and Afterthought.
So I'm going to show you that
it's pretty easy to do this,
even if you didn't think of it initially.
Let's go over here to People.
And, you know, I don't think I need to
demo this too extensively.
You create a list of
people in this application.
They're saved out in the document using
Core Data and NS Persistent Document.
But this is not very personal.
It's pretty bland, actually.
But it's meant to be a technology
demonstration for Core Data.
Let's turn it into something
a little more personal.
So this is the new Event Manager.
That looks the same, of course.
But you'll see that I've
added this image column,
and I did that in Interface
Builder beforehand.
And like I said,
if you have somebody that
doesn't match the Address Book,
you should use that
default NS user image.
So we start there with that.
And let me bring up
Address Book real quick,
just so you can believe me.
There's John,
our good friend John Appleseed.
Let's change the name
here and see what happens.
So I've written the name,
and now I've got a picture of John.
So maybe if I know 10
people named John Appleseed,
I can make sure which one it is.
But this immediately adds some
additional flavor to the application.
It's not just a gray and
white window anymore.
Now we've got people,
personal information here.
How did we do that?
It's pretty straightforward.
First, as you saw,
Let me open up the nib here.
As you saw,
I added a column to the table.
I'm not going to walk through this
because we do have a lot to cover.
I think I've opened the wrong project.
So let's just go right over to the code.
So Core Data has pretty much a
codeless data persistence system.
The idea here is that you don't
have to write a lot of code.
And you'll see here-- you can tell here
by the names of the files that a lot of
this stuff is things that I've added.
And we'll get to the calendar
store additions later.
But what I've done is I've created this
special subclass of NSManageObject.
And I don't want to have to
teach you guys Core Data,
too.
I want to stick to two frameworks,
not three.
But what I've basically done here is I'm
paying attention to whenever the first
or last name changes in the application.
And when that happens,
I go ahead and I produce a search
element for the first and last name.
Hi, I'm Matt Drance,
and I'm here to talk about
the CASE-insensitive search.
I'm a CASE-insensitive searcher,
and I'm going to talk about
the CASE-insensitive search.
And I populate a list of Address
Book matches based on the name that
currently exists in the person.
And then this method, Image,
is what the image column in
the interface is bound to.
So you notice there's no GUI code here.
This is just data code,
and that's because I'm using
Cocoa bindings on the other
side to just pluck the image
right out from the interface.
So those people who are new or
not familiar with Cocoa bindings,
we'll make this sample available.
You can see how it works.
But we've got some great
tutorial on bindings.
And this is it.
And you notice I construct
an image from the data.
So you see here I'm getting
the image data from the person.
And then I call NSImageInItWithData.
And if the image does not exist,
I go ahead and I return
that NSImageNamedNsUser.
This is literally the code pretty
much right out of the slides.
So this is really straightforward.
This code is the entirety of what we
had to write to hook that stuff up.
There wasn't a whole lot of property
listening or playing around that
we had to do to get into that code.
And again,
this was written three years ago.
I just pulled this out.
Actually, I did this this morning.
You might choose to believe me or not.
Two weeks, I think,
has been the popular amount
of time for demos this week.
But actually,
this took me about two hours,
including the calendar part of it.
So very straightforward.
Couple of minutes of work,
a couple of lines of code,
and we've immediately
added faces to names.
Can we go back to the slides, please?
So you notice that that was
a document-based application.
I didn't save the document out,
but this begs the question of
if I'm going to link myself
to the Address Book framework,
and I have documents that are
moving around the file system,
and maybe they're moving between
machines where there may or may
not be the same Address Book.
It may not be consistent.
How do I negotiate that?
How do I make sure that the user
experience is not completely broken
with this document when it moves around?
So I've got some pretty
straightforward advice for you.
First of all,
you want to save the unique ID you get.
When you find a person,
get that unique ID and save that,
because that's just a string.
It's a really lightweight way
of hooking back to that person.
But you also want to save the data
that's really critical and important
to providing that info to the user.
So maybe it's just first and last name,
like in the case of this.
Maybe it's also email,
or maybe it's a phone number.
But just little pieces of data.
You don't need to save everything out,
like the image or other
pieces of information,
like their 10 addresses and their
birthday and the name of their
best friend from high school.
And then go ahead and fetch the rest.
Whatever else, whatever additional
flavor you want to add,
such as the picture,
you can go ahead and pull that back
when the document's loaded again.
Now, if the ID is invalid,
maybe the user deleted the
person from the Address Book,
or maybe they moved the document
from one machine to another where the
ID may be different due to syncing
or other inconsistent changes.
Obviously,
you construct a search element,
and you would fall back to
that data that you saved.
So the stuff that's important to you,
both for displaying it on the screen,
as well as
[Transcript missing]
And there's one other thing that we want
to talk about with the Address Book data,
and that's notifications.
Because this is a framework,
any other number of running apps
can go ahead and be modifying this
database while you're a client of it.
And the Address Book application
itself could be one of them.
So you want to register for
notifications to these changes.
So we have notifications that
include lists of updated contacts,
contacts that were added,
new contacts that were added,
as well as contacts that were
removed from the database.
And this follows the standard
Cocoa pattern of notifications.
So you just use the standard
notification center,
and you go ahead and register
for external changes using the
constants that we provided.
But make sure you understand this is
not the distributed notification center,
for those of you new to
Cocoa or not new to Cocoa.
The distributed notification center
is what you traditionally use to get
notifications from outside your process.
But in this case,
because it's really coming from a
framework that you've linked against,
you always use the regular
notification center,
regardless of where the
change actually came from.
So that's it for data access,
and I mentioned before that
there's a reusable UI that
we provide to you as well,
and this is called the People Picker,
the AB People Picker View Class.
And this basically gives you an
address book view that looks very
similar to the application as well
as the other applications that
you've seen like iChat and Mail,
just to name a few.
And it has a free search field,
it has access to all of the groups that
you see normally in the address book,
and it also gives you the
ability to specify which
properties you want to be visible.
So this view is actually
accessible from Interface Builder.
You don't have to write a lot
of code to make this work.
You can drag it right out of
IB and right into your window.
It's also fully
configurable from within IB.
So I mentioned before,
you can choose to just show
a number of properties,
like the phone number and the email.
Otherwise, you'll have a huge list of
all the properties that are
available in the address book.
And things like allowing multiple
selection and what the default
displayed property would be.
All of it's configurable from within
Interface Builder or from inside code.
And you can also set up a callback for
when the user double-clicks on a value.
So you go ahead and, obviously,
this is a people picker.
You want to know when the
person picked something.
So you register a callback
to get that information,
and you're done.
So that's it for the Address Book.
Again, the Address Book is
really the way you want